gh-123152: Add a Concurrency Howto Page (#123163)
python/cpython: Doc/howto/concurrency.rst

     - `interpreters <python-stdlib-interpreters_>`_
     - small-medium
     - yes
     - no
     - `low+ <python-interpreters-overhead_>`_
     - `yes* <python-stdlib-interpreters_>`_
   * - coroutines `(Python) <python-coroutines_>`_
     - :mod:`asyncio`
     - small-medium
     - **no**
     - no
     - low
     - no
   * - multiprocessing `(Python) <python-multiprocessing_>`_
     - :mod:`multiprocessing`
     - small
     - yes
     - no
     - **medium**
     - yes
   * - distributed `(Python) <python-distributed_>`_
     - :pypi:`dask`
     - large
     - yes
     - no
     - **medium+**
     - no

All About Concurrency
=====================

What is concurrency?
--------------------

At its most fundamental, concurrency means doing multiple things at once,
from a strictly *logical* viewpoint.

When a computer program runs, it executes a sequence of code
in a given order.  If you were to trace the actual execution, you would
still end up with a *linear* series of executed instructions that matches
the code.  We call this sequence of code (and instructions) a logical
"thread" of execution.

Sometimes it makes sense to break up that sequence into smaller pieces,

> where some of them can run independently of others.  Thus the program

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where some of them can run independently of others.  Thus, the program
```

then involves multiple logical threads.  This is also called
"multitasking" and each logical thread a "task".

As an example of splitting up the sequence, consider the following
abstract program with three pieces::

   prep
   do A
   do B

If both ``do A`` and ``do B`` only rely on ``prep`` having completed,
then we could rearrange the program in one of the following ways and
end up with the same result::

   prep   =   prep    prep   =   prep -----
   do B   =   do A    do B   =     |      |
   do A   =                  =   do A   do B

> In the first alternative, we swap ``do A`` and ``do B``.  In the second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the first alternative, we swap ``do A`` and ``do B``.  In the second,
```

Author: I'm removing this.

> one we split the original program into two programs that we can run at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 we split the original program into two programs that we can run at
```

Author: I'm removing this.

> the same time.  In the third one, we run ``do A`` and ``do B`` at the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the same time.  In the third, we run ``do A`` and ``do B`` at the
```

Author: I'm removing this.

can be represented instead as a single task, with the code of the
concurrent tasks merged into a single sequence.

What is parallelism?
--------------------

Concurrency may happen in one of two ways.  The concurrent tasks may
share a single CPU, each running a little bit at a time, with the
operating system (or language runtime) taking care of the switching.
The other way is where each task runs on its own CPU, meaning they
are physically running at the same time, not just logically.

That second way is parallelism.

Modern CPUs are designed around parallelism, with multiple cores
and sometimes multiple execution pipelines per core.  The operating
system exposes physical CPU threads as OS threads and as processes.
A programming language (or runtime) may add additional layers of
abstraction on top of that.

Parallelism is where concurrent logical threads are running
on distinct physical threads across multiple cores,

Concurrency Models
------------------

The concept of concurrency has been a part of the study and practice
of computer software since very early on, in the 1950s and 1960s,
long before the wide-spread adoption of multi-core CPUs.  Clearly

> its about more than just parallelism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it's about more than just parallelism.
```

Author: I'm removing this.

Over the decades, research and use of concurrency has led to a variety
of well defined abstract models, with different characteristics and
tradeoffs.  The application of the different theoretical concurrency
models can be categorized as follows:

================= ==========
free threads      using multiple physical threads in the same process,
                  with no isolation between them
isolated threads  threads, often physical, with strict isolation
                  between them (e.g. CSP and actor model)
coroutines        "cooperative multitasking", AKA async/await
multiprocessing   using multiple isolated processes
distributed       multiprocessing across multiple computers
================= ==========

(There are certainly others, but these are the focus here.)

There are tradeoffs to each.  Free-threading probably has the most

> notoriety and the most examples, but is also has the most pitfalls

Reviewer: ```suggestion
notoriety and the most examples, but it also has the most pitfalls
```

(see `concurrency-downsides`_ below).

> Isolated threads have few of those pitfalls but are less familiar.

Reviewer: I think there should probably be a new line before this line, right?

Author: In ReST it ignores wrapping like this, so I sometimes start new sentences on a new line like this to avoid churn as I refactor paragraphs.  Then I can rely on ReST to clean it up for me. 😄

> Multiprocessing and distributed are likewise isolated, but less

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiprocessing and distributed computing are likewise isolated, but less
```

I'm not sure if computing is quite the right word here but this reads a bit strange without it, IMO.

Author: Your suggestion makes sense to me.

efficient, which can have a larger negative impact at smaller scales.

> Async can be straightforward, but may cascade throughout a code base

Reviewer: Same comment here... should this be async computing? Or something similar?

Author: I've heard "async" use like this relatively frequently.  However, I'm open to clarifying it you think it needs it.

> and doesn't necessarily give you parallelism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and doesn't necessarily afford parallelism.
```

Author: I'll tweak this.

-----------------------

The main challenge when using concurrency is the (potential) extra
complexity.  This complexity comes from the effect of multiple logical
threads running at the same time and interacting with each other.
In practice, this falls into two categories: data races and tracing
relative execution.  Both are a form of "spooky action at a distance" [#f1]_
(meaning something changes unexpectedly in one place due to unknown
changes somewhere else).

The first category relates to mutable data shared between threads:
a data race is where one thread writes to memory at a time when another
thread is expecting the value to be unchanged, invalidating its logic.
Similarly, two threads could write to the same memory location at the
same time, either corrupting the data there or invalidating
the expectations of one of the threads.

In each case, the non-deterministic scheduling of threads means it is
both hard to reproduce races and to track down where a race happened.
These qualities much these bugs especially frustrating
and worth diligently avoiding.

Races are possible when the concurrency approach is subject
to parallel execution or to non-deterministic switching.

> (This excludes coroutines, which rely on cooperative multitasking.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This excludes coroutines, which rely on cooperative multitasking.
```

Author: I'm dropping this.

When all memory is possibly shared, as is the case with free-threading,
then all memory is at risk.

> Dealing with data races is often managed using locks (AKA mutexes),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dealing with data races is often managed using locks (aka mutexes),
```

Author: I thought we always capitalize acronyms.  However, I'm fine with changing this if we do it a different way.

at a low level, and thread-safe types and APIs at a high level.
Depending on the programming language, the complexity is sometimes

> mitigated somewhat by the compiler and runtime.  There are even

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mitigated by the compiler and runtime.  There are even
```

libraries and frameworks that help abstract away the complexity
to an extent.  On top of that, there are tools that can help identify
potential races via static analysis.  Unfortunately, none of these aids
is foolproof and the risk of hitting a race is always looming.

.. XXX mention reentrancy?

The second category of complexity is the problem of tracing the execution
of one logical thread relative to another.  This is especially relevant
for error handling, when an error in the one thread is exposed in the
other.  This applies equally to threads that start other threads as to
concurrency models that use callbacks.  Knowing where the failing thread
was started is valuable when debugging, as is knowing where a callback
was registered.

Workloads
---------

In practice, concurrency is used in a wide variety of software.

> Here's a not-comprehensive list:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a non-exhaustive list:
```

Author: I'm dropping this line.

       * API can be hard to use
   * - distributed
     - :pypi:`dask`
     - large
     - * isolated (no races)
       * fully parallel
       * facilitates massive scaling
     - * not necessarily a good fit for small-scale applications
       * often requires configuration

.. _concurrency-overhead-table:

Here's a comparison of the overhead of each model in Python:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :class: borderless vert-aligned
   :align: left

   * - model
     - memory
     - startup
     - cross-task
     - management
     - system
   * - free threading
     - very low
     - very low
     - none
     - very low
     - none
   * - multiple interpreters
     - `low* <python-interpreters-overhead_>`_
     - `medium* <python-interpreters-overhead_>`_
     - low
     - very low
     - none
   * - coroutines
     - low
     - low
     - none
     - low
     - none
   * - multiprocessing
     - medium
     - medium
     - medium
     - medium
     - low
   * - distributed
     - medium+
     - medium+
     - medium-high
     - medium
     - low-medium

.. _python-free-threading:

Free-threading
--------------

.. currentmodule:: threading

> Threads, through the :mod:`threading` module, have been the dominant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Threads, provided by the :mod:`threading` module, have been the dominant
```

Author: I'm dropping this line.

> tool in Python concurrency for decades, which mirrors the generate state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tool in Python concurrency for decades, reflecting the general state
```

Author: I'm dropping this line.

> of software in general.  Threads are very light-weight and efficient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of software development.  Threads are very lightweight and efficient.
```

Author: I'm dropping this line.

Most importantly, they are the most direct route to taking advantage
of multi-core parallelism (more an that in a moment).

The main downside to using threads is that each one shares the full

> memory of the process with all the others.  That exposes programs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
memory of the process with all the others.  This behavior exposes programs
```

Author: I'm dropping this.

to a significant risk of `races <concurrency-downsides_>`_.

The other potential problem with using threads is that the conceptual
model has no inherent synchronization, so it can be hard to follow
what is going on in the program at any given moment.  That is

> especially challenging for testing and debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The other potential problem with using threads is that the conceptual
model has no inherent synchronization, so it can be hard to follow
what is going on in the program at any given moment, as well as
test and debug.
```

Author: I'm we trying to avoid a run-on sentence.  I also wanted to emphasize the impact on testing and debugging.  I'll tweak this.

Using threads for concurrency boils down to:

1. create a thread object to run a function
2. start the thread

> 3. (optionally) wait for it to finish

Reviewer: ``` suggestion
1. Creating a thread object to run a function
2. Starting the thread
3. Waiting for it to finish (optional)
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure if the convention is to keep bulleted lists all lowercase. Feel free to ignore the casing here!

Author: Yeah, we typically do so (and to limit each bullet to a single phrase or sentence).

        # Do something.
        ...

    t = threading.Thread(target=task)
    t.start()

    # Do other stuff.

    t.join()

.. _python-gil:

The Global Interpreter Lock (GIL)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While physical threads are the direct route to multi-core parallelism,
Python's threads have always had an extra wrinkle that gets in the way:
the :term:`global interpreter lock` (GIL).

The :term:`!GIL` is very efficient tool for keeping the Python
implementation simple, which is an important constraint for the project.
In fact, it protects Python's maintainers and users from a large
category of concurrency problems that one must normally face when
threads are involved.

The big tradeoff is that the bytecode interpreter, which executes your
Python code, only runs while holding the :term:`!GIL`.  That means only
one thread can be running Python code at a time.  Threads will take
short turns, so none have to wait too long, but it still prevents
any actual parallelism.

At the same time, the Python runtime (and extension modules) can
release the :term:`!GIL` when the thread is going to be doing something
unrelated to Python, particularly something slow or long,

> like a blocking IO operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the same time, the Python runtime (and extension modules) can
release the :term:`!GIL` when the thread is doing slow or long-running work 
unrelated to Python, like a blocking I/O operation.
```

There is also an ongoing effort to eliminate the :term:`!GIL`:

> :pep:`630`.  Any attempt to remove the :term:`!GIL` necessarily involves

Reviewer: Is this the link to the right PEP? Should this link to 703?

Author: Good catch!

parallelism and for a simpler conceptual model: use multiple interpreters.

Python's major implementation, CPython, has for decades supported
running with multiple independent copies of the Python runtime
("interpreter") in a single process.  However, these interpreters
weren't completely isolated from one another; most importantly they
shared the one :term:`!GIL`.  Over several years a lot of work went
into improving the isolation between interpreters, culminating in
no longer sharing a single :term:`!GIL`.

Besides unlocking full multi-core parallelism, the isolation between
interpreters means that, from a conceptual level, concurrency can be
simpler.  An interpreter encapsulates all of Python's runtime state,
including things like :data:`sys.modules`.  By default, interpreters
mostly don't share any data (including objects) at all.  Anything that
gets shared is done on a strictly opt-in basis.  That means programmers
don't need to worry about possible `races <concurrency-downsides_>`_
with *any* data in the program.  They only need to worry about data
that was explicitly shared.

Using multiple interpreters is fairly straight-forward:

> 1. create a new interpreter
> 2. switch the current thread to use that interpreter
> 3. call :func:`exec`, but targeting the new interpreter
> 4. switch back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a new interpreter
2. Switch the current thread to use that interpreter
3. Call :func:`exec`, but targeting the new interpreter
4. Switch back
```

Author: I'll probably leave this as-is.

You can use the :mod:`!interpreters` module (more on that in a moment)
to do this::

    import interpreters

    script = """if True:
        # Do something.
        ...
        """

    interp = interpreters.create()
    interp.exec(script)

> Note that no threads were involved.  That's because running in an
> interpreter happens relative to the current thread.  New threads
> aren't implicitly involved.  They can be added in explicitly though.
> Why?  For multi-core parallelism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that no threads were involved because running in an
interpreter happens relative to the current thread.  New threads
aren't implicitly involved, but they can be added explicitly if the
developer wants multi-core parallelism.
```

thread.

Here's the very explicit way to do that::

    import interpreters
    import threading

    script = """if True:
        # Do something.
        ...
        """

    def task():
        interp = interpreters.create()
        interp.exec(script)

    t = threading.Thread(target=task)
    t.start()

    # Do other stuff.

    t.join()

There's a convenience method too::

    import interpreters

    def task():
        # Do something.
        ...

    interp = interpreters.create()
    t = interp.call_in_thread(task)

    # Do other stuff.

    t.join()

.. _python-stdlib-interpreters:

A Stdlib Module for Using Multiple Interpreters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

While use of multiple interpreters has been part of Python's C-API
for decades, the feature hasn't been exposed to Python code through
the stdlib.  :pep:`734` proposes changing that by adding a new
:mod:`!interpreters` module.

In the meantime, an implementation of that PEP is available for
Python 3.13+ on PyPI: :pypi:`interpreters-pep-734`.

.. _python-interpreters-overhead:

Improving Performance for Multiple Interpreters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The long effort to improve on Python's implementation of multiple
> interpreters focused on isolation and stability.  There was very little
> done to improve performance.  This has the most impact on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The long-running effort to improve Python's implementation of multiple
interpreters focused on isolation and stability, and very little was
done to improve performance.  This has the most impact on:
```

> * how much memory each interpreter uses

Reviewer: Same comment here re. list casing.

  (i.e. how many can run at the same time)
* how long it takes to create a new interpreter

> As the work on isolation wraps up, improvements will shift to focus
> on performance and memory usage.  Thus the overhead associated with
> using multiple interpreters will drastically decrease over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the work on isolation wraps up, improvements will shift to focus
on performance and memory usage.  Thus, the overhead of
using multiple interpreters will drastically decrease over time.
```

.. _python-coroutines:

Coroutines (Async/Await)
------------------------

.. currentmodule:: asyncio

The use of :term:`coroutines <coroutine>` for concurrency has been
around a long time and has grown in popularity in the software world,
particularly with the addition of ``async/await`` syntax in
various languages.

Python has supported coroutines to some degree since the beginning.
The best example is :pypi:`twisted`, which has provided this concurrency

> model for decades.  For most of that time :pypi:`!twisted` did it
> primarily through callbacks and a form of "promises"/"futures".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
model for decades.  For most of that time, :pypi:`!twisted` supported 
coroutines primarily through callbacks and a form of promises or futures.
```

Author: I'm dropping this.

> Explicit support for coroutines in Python really started with the
> introduction of :term:`generators <generator>` in Python 2.2
> (:pep:`255`).  In Python 2.5 (:pep:`342`), :term:`!generators` were
> tweaked to explicitly support use as coroutines.  That went a step
> further in Python 3.3 with the addition of ``yield from`` (:pep:`380`)
> and the :mod:`asyncio` module (:pep:`3156`).  Finally, in Python 3.5
> (:pep:`492`), we got dedicated ``async/await`` syntax
> and :ref:`a dedicated protocol <coroutine-protocol>`
> for :term:`!coroutine` objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Explicit support for coroutines in Python started with the
introduction of :term:`generators <generator>` in Python 2.2
(:pep:`255`).  In Python 2.5 (:pep:`342`), :term:`!generators` were
tweaked to support coroutines more explicitly.  In Python 3.3, we added 
``yield from`` (:pep:`380`) and the :mod:`asyncio` module (:pep:`3156`).  
And finally, in Python 3.5 (:pep:`492`), we got dedicated ``async/await`` syntax
and :ref:`a dedicated protocol <coroutine-protocol>` for :term:`!coroutine` 
objects.
```

Author: I'm dropping this.

There are three main pieces to using coroutines:

* coroutines (non-blocking, yield control instead)
* an event loop (schedules coroutines)
* coroutine wrappers around blocking operations

A :term:`coroutine function` looks *almost* the same as a regular
function.  It is a non-blocking function that *cooperatively* yields
control of the program to other coroutines, which in turn yield control
back (eventually).  At those points of synchronization,
coroutines often provide data to one another.

The event loop is what keeps track of which coroutines have yielded
control and which should get control next.

> Generally a coroutine needs to avoid doing anything that takes very long
> before yielding control back to the event loop.  Any blocking operation
> in a coroutine, like waiting on a socket, has to be implemented in a way
> that only waits a little while, yields, and then waits again, etc. until
> ready.  The alternative is to wrap the blocking operation/function
> in some sort of "future" coroutine that yields until the blocking
> operation completes.  The event loop can also fill that role
> to an extent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, a coroutine needs to avoid doing anything that takes a long time
before yielding control back to the event loop.  Any blocking operation
in a coroutine, like waiting on a socket, has to be implemented in a way
that only waits a little while, yields, and then waits again, etc., until
ready.  The alternative is to wrap the blocking operation/function
in a "future" coroutine that yields until the blocking
operation completes.  The event loop can also fill that role
to an extent.
```

Author: I'm dropping this.

    async def task(data):
        # Do something small.
        await asyncio.sleep(0.1)
        # Do something else small.
        return data

    # Run it once, basically synchronously.
    res = asyncio.run(task('spam!')
    assert res == 'spam!', repr(res)

    # Run it multiple times concurrently.
    values = list(range(5))
    res = asyncio.run(
        asyncio.gather(*(task(v) for v in values))
    )
    assert res == values, (res, values)

One of the main challenges with using coroutines is that they do not
normally mix well with non-coroutines.  As a result, ``async/await``
can be contagious, requiring surrounding code to be async.  This can
lead to having the same thing implemented twice, once normal and once
async, with significant code duplication.

.. currentmodule:: None

.. _python-multiprocessing:

Multi-processing
----------------

.. currentmodule:: multiprocessing

The stdlib :mod:`multiprocessing` module, which has been around many
years, provides an API for using multiple processes for concurrency.
Furthermore, processes are always isolated, so you have many of the
same benefits of using multiple interpreters, including multi-core
parallelism.

> There are some obstacles however.  First of all, using multiple
> processes has a higher overhead than operating in a single process,
> sometimes significantly higher.  This applies in just about every
> dimension of overhead.  Secondly, the :mod:`multiprocessing` module's
> API is substantially larger and more complex that what we use for
> threads and multiple interpreters.  Finally, there are some scaling
> issues with using multiple processes, related both to the performance
> overhead and to how the operating system assigns resources like
> file handles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some obstacles, however.  First, using multiple
processes has a higher overhead than operating in a single process,
sometimes significantly higher.  This applies in just about every
dimension of overhead.  Secondly, the :mod:`multiprocessing` module's
API is substantially larger and more complex than what we use for
threads and multiple interpreters.  Finally, there are some scaling
issues with using multiple processes, related to the performance
overhead and how the operating system assigns resources like
file handles.
```

Author: I'm dropping this.

Here's a very basic example::

    import multiprocessing

    def task():
        # Do something.
        pass

    p = multiprocessing.Process(target=task)
    p.start()

    # Do other stuff.

    p.join()

> The similarity with :class:`threading.Thread` is intentional.
> On top of that, the :mod:`multiprocessing` module provides an extensive
> API to address a variety of needs, including machinery for inter-process
> shared memory.  Also note that that API can be used for threads and
> (eventually) interpreters using different backends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The similarity with :class:`threading.Thread` is intentional.
On top of that, the :mod:`multiprocessing` module provides an extensive
API to address a variety of needs, including machinery for inter-process
shared memory.  Also, note that its API can be used for threads and
(eventually) interpreters using different backends.
```

Author: I'm dropping this.

    assert res == 'spam!', repr(res)

    # Run it multiple times concurrently.
    values = list(range(5))
    res = client.gather(
        (client.submit(task, v) for v in values),
    )
    assert res == values, (res, values)

concurrent.futures
------------------

.. currentmodule:: concurrent.futures

:mod:`concurrent.futures` provides a high-level abstraction around
using concurrency in Python.

The :class:`Executor` base class is the focal point of the API.
It is implemented for threads as :class:`ThreadPoolExecutor`, wrapping
:class:`threading.Thread`.  It is implemented for subprocesses as
:class:`ProcessPoolExecutor`, wrapping :mod:`multiprocessing`.
It will be implemented for multiple interpreters as
:class:`!InterpreterPoolExecutor`.  Each implementation has some very
minor uniqueness that we'll look at in a moment.

.. note: :mod:`multiprocessing`, :mod:`asyncio`, and :pypi:`dask`
   provide similar APIs.  In the case of :mod:`!multiprocessing`,
   that API also supports thread and interpreter backends.

.. note: Generic examples in this section will use the thread-based
   implementation.  However, any of the other implementations
   can be simply substituted.

> With an executor you can call a function asynchronously (in the background)
> using :meth:`Executor.submit`.  It returns a :class:`Future` object
> which tracks completion and provides the result.
> :class:`!Future` objects have a few other tricks, like cancellation
> and completion callbacks, which we won't cover here.
> Likewise we won't cover the various uses of timeouts.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With an executor, you can call a function asynchronously (in the background)
using :meth:`Executor.submit`, which returns a :class:`Future` object
to track completion and provide the result.
:class:`!Future` objects have a few other tricks, like cancellation
and completion callbacks, which we won't cover here.
Likewise, we won't cover the various uses of timeouts.

```

Author: I'm dropping this.

   :name: concurrency-cf-wait
   :start-after: [start-cf-wait]
   :end-before: [end-cf-wait]
   :dedent:
   :linenos:

You can use :func:`as_completed` to handle each :class:`!Future`
as it completes:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/concurrency.py
   :name: concurrency-cf-as-completed
   :start-after: [start-cf-as-completed]
   :end-before: [end-cf-as-completed]
   :dedent:
   :linenos:

In each case handling errors on a per-:class:`!Future` basis
is straightforward:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/concurrency.py
   :name: concurrency-cf-error-result-1
   :start-after: [start-cf-error-result-1]
   :end-before: [end-cf-error-result-1]
   :dedent:
   :linenos:

.. literalinclude:: ../includes/concurrency.py
   :name: concurrency-cf-error-result-2
   :start-after: [start-cf-error-result-2]
   :end-before: [end-cf-error-result-2]
   :dedent:
   :linenos:

As promised, here's a look at what is unique to each of the
:class:`Executor` implementations.

:class:`ThreadPoolExecutor`:

* ...

:class:`ProcessPoolExecutor`:

* ...

:class:`!InterpreterPoolExecutor`:

* ...

.. currentmodule:: None

Python Concurrency Workload Examples
====================================

> Below we have a series of examples of how to implement the most
> common Python workloads that take advantage of concurrency.
> For each workload you will find an implementation for each of the
> concurrency models.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below, we have a series of examples of how to implement the most
common Python workloads that take advantage of concurrency.
For each workload, you will find an implementation for each of the
concurrency models.

```

Here's a summary of the examples, by workload:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :class: borderless vert-aligned
   :align: left

   * - workload
     - req in
     - req out
     - *N* core tasks
     - core task
   * - `grep <Workload: grep_>`_
     - | *N* filenames (**stdin**)
       | file bytes x *N* (**disk**)
     - *M* matches (**stdout**)
     - 1+ per file
     - | **time**: ~ file size
       | **mem**: small
   * - `resize image <Workload: Image Resizer_>`_
     - image (**net**)
     - image (**net**)
     - | *N* small sub-images
       | **mem**: ~ 2x image size
     - | **time**: short
       | **mem**: small
   * - `... <Workload: ..._>`_
     - ...
     - ...
     - ...
     - ...

.. other examples:

   * <numeric> (scientific, finance, ML, matrices)
   * conway's game of life
   * raytracer
   * mandelbrot
   * find primes
   * compute factorials
   * <apply transforms>
   * <merge-sort on a bunch of dicts>

   * <backtracking>
   * <divide-and-conquer>
   * <map-reduce>

Also see:

* https://github.com/faster-cpython/ideas/wiki/Tables:-Workloads
* https://github.com/ericsnowcurrently/concurrency-benchmarks

.. note::

>    Each example is implemented as a basic commandline tool, but can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Each example is implemented as a basic command line tool, but can be
```

:tocdepth: 3

.. XXX reference vs. tutorial?

.. _concurrency-howto:

*****************
Concurrency HOWTO
*****************

There are many outstanding resources, both online and in print,
that would do an excellent job of introducing you to concurrency.
This howto document builds on those by walking you through how
to apply that knowledge using Python.

Python supports the following concurrency models directly:

* **free-threading** (stdlib, C-API)

> * **isolated threads**, *AKA CSP/actor model* (stdlib\*, C-API)

Reviewer 2: What's the asterisk after "stdlib" for?

Author: Good point.  There needed to be some reference to the later note about PEP 734.  However, I can drop the asterisk now that I've landed `InterpreterPoolExecutor`.

   Other concurrency models have demonstrated better usability and
   newer programming languages typically avoid exposing threads directly.
   Take that into consideration before reaching for threads and look at
   the alternatives first.

.. note::

   Python supports other concurrency models indirectly through
   community-maintained PyPI packages.  One well-known example is
   :pypi:`dask`, which supports "distributed" computing.

Quick reference
===============

**Terminology**

We'll be using the following terms and ideas throughout:

task (logical thread)
   | a cohesive *linear* sequence of abstract steps in a program;
   | effectively, a mini-program;
   | the logical equivalent of executed instructions corresponding to code;
   | also known as "logical process"

physical thread (OS thread)
   | where the actual code for a logical thread runs on the CPU (and operating system);
   | we avoid using using plain "thread" for this, to avoid ambiguity

Python thread
   | the Python runtime running in a physical thread
   | particularly the portion of the runtime state active in the physical thread
   | (see :class:`threading.Thread`)

concurrency (multitasking)

>    | a program with multiple logical threads running simultaneously

Reviewer 2: I always say that concurrency gives the "sensation" of that two things run at the same time but it's not 100% true as with parallelism. In that context, what about changing a little this sentence to "a program with multiple logical threads running *apparently* simultaneously"?

code.  The full runtime supports multiple interpreters and includes
some state that all interpreters share.  Most importantly, the state
of each interpreter is effectively isolated from the others.

That isolation includes things like :data:`sys.modules`.  By default,
interpreters mostly don't share any data (including objects) at all.
Anything that gets shared is done on a strictly opt-in basis.  That
means programmers wouldn't need to worry about possible races with
*any* data in the program.  They would only need to worry about data
that was explicitly shared.

Interpreters themselves are not specific to any thread, but instead
each physical thread has (at most) one interpreter active at any given
moment.  Each interpreter can be associated in this way with any number
of threads.  Since each interpreter is isolated from the others,
any thread using one interpreter is thus isolated from threads
using any other interpreter.

Using multiple interpreters is fairly straight-forward:

1. create a new interpreter
2. switch the current thread to use that interpreter
3. call :func:`exec`, but targeting the new interpreter
4. switch back

> Note that no threads were involved; running in an

Reviewer 2: This is a bit confusing; the second step before says "switch the current thread" and now it says "no threads were involved". I understand that before it means "switch this one main thread" and here is more "no other threads were involved, not multithreading at all", but maybe this could be rephrased?

Author: Yeah, it should be "no new threads were involved".  I'll fix that.

While use of multiple interpreters has been part of Python's C-API
for decades, the feature hasn't been exposed to Python code through
the stdlib.  :pep:`734` proposes changing that by adding a new
:mod:`!interpreters` module.

In the meantime, an implementation of that PEP is available for
Python 3.13+ on PyPI: :pypi:`interpreters-pep-734`.

.. _python-interpreters-overhead:

Improving performance for multiple interpreters
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The long-running effort to improve on Python's implementation of multiple
interpreters focused on isolation and stability; very little done
to improve performance.  This has the most impact on:

* how much memory each interpreter uses
  (i.e. how many can run at the same time)
* how long it takes to create a new interpreter

It also impacts how efficiently data/objects can be passed between
interpreters, and how effectively objects can be shared.

As the work on isolation wraps up, improvements will shift to focus
on performance and memory usage.  Thus, the overhead of
using multiple interpreters will drastically decrease over time.

Shared resources
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Aside from memory, all physical threads in a process share the

Reviewer 2: This is true also for multiple interpreters? here it says explicitly "physical threads", but all the last points were about multiple interpreters and confuses a little.

Author: This section covers caveats for all the different concurrency models, though I can see how the ordering of the sub-sections may have lead to confusion.  I'll either move this section earlier or I'll add a sentence to make it clear that it applies to Python threads and multiple interpreters equally.

following resources:

* command line arguments ("argv")
* env vars
* current working directory
* signals, IPC, etc.
* open I/O resources (file descriptors, sockets, etc.)

When relevant, these must be managed in a thread-safe way.

Tracing execution
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

TBD

> .. TODO finish

Reviewer 2: I always mention "determinism" as one of my favourite assets of async in comparison with threading. The following sentences are not to explain this to *you*, but what I use to explain to people learning about this, maybe some of this can be incorporated here or in other part.

So...

In contrast with threading, where "something" (Python, the OS, the CPU) can take you out from the processor, in asyncio as it's a collaborative model you always have to yield it. Of course, you need to be sure to not be too greedy about it, but also means that the code you read sequentially, it happens sequentially. 

In other words, if you have a logger call in line 5 and other logger call in line 27, when you're trying to debug what happened to a run of your program, and you check a log file, as you see the corresponding log line to logger call in code line 5, and the you see the corresponding log line to logger call in code line 27, you *are sure* that nothing got in the middle. This way, you can think of that part of the code sequentially, nothing changed any state, no objects values where modified, nobody messed with your system between those lines. And that is a HUGE difference with threading model, where you read those lines of code and you know that unless somehing is wrapped in a lock, a million things could have happened between line N  and line N+1.

Author: Yeah, I got started on this section but didn't feel like my thoughts were enough organized to be clear yet. 😄  I'll see about incorporating your explanation.

that have been designed specifically for distributed computing,
like :pypi:`dask`.

Resilience to crashes
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A process can crash if it does something it shouldn't, like try to
access memory outside what the OS has provided it.  If your program
is running in multiple processes (incl. distributed) then you can
more easily recover from a crash in any one process.  Recovering
from a crash when using free-threading, multiple interpreters, or
coroutines isn't nearly so easy.

High-level APIs
---------------

Also note that Python's stdlib provides various higher-level APIs
that support these concurrency models in various contexts:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :class: borderless vert-aligned
   :align: left

   * -
     - :mod:`concurrent.futures`
     - :mod:`socketserver`
     - :mod:`http.server`
   * - free-threading
     - :class:`yes <concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor>`
     - :class:`yes <socketserver.ThreadingMixIn>`
     - :class:`yes <http.server.ThreadingHTTPServer>`
   * - multiple interpreters
     - (`pending <python-stdlib-interpreters_>`_)
     -
     -
   * - coroutines

>      - ???

Reviewer 2: Maybe `gather`? https://docs.python.org/dev/library/asyncio-task.html#asyncio.gather

>      -

Reviewer 2: https://docs.python.org/dev/library/asyncio-stream.html#asyncio.start_server

>      -

Reviewer 2: https://pypi.org/project/aiohttp/

   * - multi-processing
     - | :class:`yes <concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor>`
       | (:class:`similar <multiprocessing.pool.Pool>`)
     - :class:`yes <socketserver.ForkingMixIn>`
     -
   * - distributed
     - ???
     -
     -

.. raw:: html

   <br/>

----

.. _concurrency-design:

Designing A Program For Concurrency
===================================

Whether you are starting a new project using concurrency or refactoring
an existing one to use it, it's important to design for concurrency
before taking one more step.  Doing so will save you a lot of
headache later.

1. decide if your program *might* benefit from concurrency
2. `break down your *logical* program into distinct tasks <concurrency-identify-tasks_>`_
3. `determine which tasks could run at the same time <concurrency-identify-tasks_>`_
4. `identify the other concurrency-related characteristics of your program <concurrency-characteristics_>`_
5. `decide which concurrency model fits best <concurrency-pick-a-model_>`_

> 6. go for it!

Reviewer 2: Surely to be done more explicit below, but maybe here we can hint that one of the major characteristics of your program regarding concurrency to select which model is best or even understand if concurrency actually applies is to identify if your program is CPU-bound or IO-bound.

Author: Great point.

Async can be straightforward, but may cascade throughout a code base
and doesn't necessarily give you parallelism.

What problems can concurrency help solve?
-----------------------------------------

Primarily, concurrency can be helpful by making your program faster
and more responsive (less latency), when possible.  In other words,
you get better computational throughput.  That happens by enabling
the following:

* run on multiple CPU cores (parallelism)
* keep blocking resources from blocking the whole program
* make sure critical tasks have priority
* make sure other tasks have a fair share of time
* process results as they come, instead of waiting for them all

Other possible benefits:

* asynchronous events can be handled more cleanly
* better efficiency using hardware resources
* improved scalability

What are the downsides?
-----------------------

The main challenge when using concurrency is the (potential) extra
complexity.  This complexity comes from the effect of multiple logical
threads running at the same time and interacting with each other.
In practice, this falls into two categories: data races and tracing

> relative execution.  Both are a form of "spooky action at a distance".

Reviewer 3: I've never heard this term before? Is this an analogy?

Author: Albert Einstein originally said it about quantum entanglement, [^1]  I suppose I could give more context (or drop the phrase). 😄

[^1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Action_at_a_distance#%22Spooky_action_at_a_distance%22

Author: done

* distributed, e.g. SMP
* async/await

Each of these will be explained, with some simple examples.  The later
workload-oriented examples will be implemented using each,
for comparison, when possible.

.. note::

   You should always make sure concurrency is the right tool for the job
   before you reach for it when solving your problem.  There are many
   cases where concurrency simply isn't applicable or will only
   complicate the solution.  In-depth discussion of this point
   is outside the scope of this document.

.. note::

   Free-threading is one of the oldest concurrency models, fundamental
   to operating systems, and widely supported in programming languages.
   However, it is generally considered perilous and not human-friendly.
   Other concurrency models have demonstrated better usability and
   newer programming languages typically avoid exposing threads directly.
   Take that into consideration before reaching for threads and look at
   the alternatives first.

.. raw:: html

   <style>
       table.vert-aligned th
       {
           vertical-align: top;
       }

       table.vert-aligned td
       {
           vertical-align: top;
       }
   </style>

> For convenience, here's a summary comparng the concurrency models

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For convenience, here's a summary comparing the concurrency models
```

One important observation is that most concurrent programs
can be represented instead as a single task, with the code of the
concurrent tasks merged into a single sequence.

What is parallelism?
--------------------

Concurrency may happen in one of two ways.  The concurrent tasks may
share a single CPU, each running a little bit at a time, with the
operating system (or language runtime) taking care of the switching.
The other way is where each task runs on its own CPU, meaning they
are physically running at the same time, not just logically.

That second way is parallelism.

Modern CPUs are designed around parallelism, with multiple cores
and sometimes multiple execution pipelines per core.  The operating
system exposes physical CPU threads as OS threads and as processes.
A programming language (or runtime) may add additional layers of
abstraction on top of that.

Parallelism is where concurrent logical threads are running
on distinct physical threads across multiple cores,

Concurrency Models
------------------

The concept of concurrency has been a part of the study and practice
of computer software since very early on, in the 1950s and 1960s,

> long before the wide-spread adotion of multi-core CPUs.  Clearly

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
long before the wide-spread adoption of multi-core CPUs.  Clearly
```
